 
 
 1.0 
 OBJECTIVE : 
 To define the procedure for development, revision and verification of art works as per the organizational and legal requirements. 
 
 
 
 2.0 
 RESPONSIBILITY : 
 Artwork in-charge / Production Head 
 
 
 
 3.0 
 ACCOUNTABILITY : 
 QA Head 
 
 
 
 4.0 
 PROCEDURE : 
 
 
 
 
 4.1 
 Development of New Artwork : - 
 
 
 4.1.1 
 New artworks shall be prepared at the time of introduction of new products. 
 
 
 4.1.2 
 QA Head and artwork in-charge shall initiate to send the draft label to printer for preparation of artwork. 
 
 
 4.1.3 
 Production Head shall decide design and colour scheme for packaging materials. 
 
 
 4.1.4 
 Printer will prepare the artwork as per the text ma tter given in the draft label. The Production Head shall approve design and colour of the artwork. 
 
 
 4.1.5 
 The prepared artwork will be sent to QA for necessary checking, correction and approval. 
 
 
 4.1.6 
 QA Head along with the Production Head will finalized the dimensions of the dummy pack and will give the approval. 
 
 
 4.1.7 
 After thorough checking with respect to the legal / company’s requirements, the artwork will be approved by QA Head and to be forward to the Printer for preparation of the positive. The approved artwork should accompany the approved dummy pack. 
 
 
 4.1.8 
 Printer will make photocopy of the approved artwork and forward three copies along with the original to QA as a reference for releasing the same . 
 
 
 4.1.9 
 Printer will make positive and the first print out of the same will be sent to the QA Dept. 
 
 
 
 4.2 
 Revision of Artwork :- 
 
 
 4.2.1 
 Revision of artwork will be made in the following cases. 
 Any pharmacopoeia change affecting the composition or generic name of the product. 
 Any change in formulation of the product required changing in the text matter. 
 Any legal requirement or Govt. Notification affecting the change in text matter. 
 Any change in pack size / design / colour scheme. 
 
 
 4.2.2 
 In all the above cases, QA Head will take the initiative to change the existing artwork. 
 
 
 4.2.3 
 The preparation and approval of the revised artwork shall be done as same procedure as described in step 4.1. 
 
 
 4.3 
 The first supply of any printed packaging material will be checked with the approved artwork and if found ok then the same shall be released for use. 
 
 5.0 
 ANNEXURES:- NA 
 
 
 6.0 
 REFERENCES:- NA 
 
 
 7.0 
 REVISION HISTORY:- 
 
 
 Sr. 
 No. 
 Revision No. 
 Date of Revision 
 SOP No. 
 Supersedes No. 
 Reason for Revision 
 
 0 5 
 01/08/2024 
 QAGE13 - 0 5 
 QAGE13 - 4 
 Change in Firm Name from “Indiana Ophthalmics” to “Indiana Ophthalmics LLP”. 
 Addition of Annexures, References and Revision History as Section 5.0, 6.0 and 7.0 respectively in the SOP. 
 
 
 
 
